User Model User-Adap Inter (2012) 22:1–7
DOI 10.1007/s11257-011-9113-9
PREFACE

Coming of age: celebrating a quarter century of user
modeling and personalization: Guest editors’
introduction
Judy Kay · Gord McCalla

Received: 26 October 2011 / Accepted: 26 October 2011
© Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2012

When Alfred Kobsa and Wolfgang Wahlster hosted the first workshop on user
modeling1 in 1986, few anticipated how important this field was to become during the
next 25 years. That early workshop led to more workshops and then the User Modeling conference, which ultimately merged with the Adaptive Hypermedia conference
in 2009 to become the User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization conference. In
parallel to the evolution of the UMAP conference series, and also under the pioneering
leadership of Alfred Kobsa, was the founding of the UMUAI journal, first appearing
in 1991, originally published by Kluwer and now by Springer. This special issue of the
UMUAI journal celebrates the first 25 years of user modeling research by providing
invited (and in the UMUAI tradition also stringently reviewed) papers from leading
experts on user modeling, adaptation, and personalization. The articles collectively
provide a superb overview of research issues in user modeling that are the likely shape
of the next decade of research, as well as an historical perspective of how these issues
have evolved since the inception of the field.
User modeling and user adapted interaction has not only grown as a research area,
but has become a central applied issue for anybody interested in understanding users as
they interact with technology. The foundational applications of learning systems (with
student modeling to help systems adapt to learner differences) and natural language
1 See the workshop proceedings (Kobsa and Wahlster 1986) and Sandra Carberry’s workshop report
(Carberry 1987). An edited collection also followed up this workshop (Kobsa and Wahlster 1989).

J. Kay (B)
School of Information Technologies, School of IT Building, University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia
e-mail: judy.kay@sydney.edu.au
G. McCalla
Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, 176 Thorvaldson Building,
110 Science Place, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5C9, Canada
e-mail: mccalla@cs.usask.ca

123

2

J. Kay, G. McCalla

dialogue systems (with user modeling to track the beliefs of the user so as to enable
the system to tailor an appropriate response to them), have been joined by a plethora of applications involving personalization including recommender systems, social
computing, targeted on-line advertising, intelligent web search, personalized help systems, adaptive interactive systems, intelligent user interfaces, etc. It is not too much
of a stretch to say that personalization is the key issue in an era when there is so much
information, and so many people interacting in so many ways, doing so many things,
using information and communications technology. Personalization is a critical need
to help save us from drowning in this ocean of information and people.
As the user modeling field has grown, the methodologies used have evolved from
a few techniques largely drawn from the area of knowledge representation, to techniques drawn from all over artificial intelligence, computer science, and even social
science. Ideas have been co-opted from machine learning and data mining, intelligent agents, the semantic web, human–computer interaction, visualization, affective
computing, web computing, e-learning, data base systems, information science, social
computing, cognitive science, education, anthropology, and so on and on. User modeling researchers have been quick to take advantage of the new insights and algorithms
developed in these other areas to enhance the capabilities of their systems for personalization and adaptivity. But, the traffic has not been all in one direction. The user
modeling application area is a tough crucible for any technique, full of unpredictable
and demanding users, noisy data, constant change, and the need for algorithms that
can respond in real time and that are scalable to large user bases. This has, at the very
least, provided a rigorous test bed for these techniques and in the best case has generated new versions of existing techniques or even brand new techniques. The papers in
this special issue illustrate many of these techniques in the context of many different
applications.
Going forward, the future for user modeling is bright indeed. The need for personalization has been widely recognized and almost every major software company
has dedicated much effort and many resources to exploring this issue from one angle
or another. In some cases, personalization is at the heart of the company’s business
model. Both the academic and the industrial research community investigating this
field are growing rapidly, and are drawn from an increasingly wide range of specializations. Trends such as cloud computing, ubiquitous connectivity, 24/7 technology
access, and Web 2.0 participatory applications ensure the need for personalization.
Luckily, they possibly also provide both the bandwidth of interaction with users and
access to their interaction data that are needed in order to understand user behavior
and to appropriately react to user needs.
Several key issues in user modeling have shifted dramatically over the field’s existence. The early problem faced by user modeling systems of having too little bandwidth
has been replaced by the opposite problem of being overwhelmed by the sheer volume of noisy, contradictory, fine-grained data about users. This new problem, while
extremely challenging, is certainly to be preferred to ignorance about user behavior!
A second shift has been from exploring toy systems in artificial situations to studying
real users “au naturel” with all of their complex real world behavior. This has brought
to the field a deep concern with human subject experimental techniques and with doing
really sound empirical studies. A third shift has happened from the early concentration

123

Guest editors’ introduction

3

on the user model itself, and its representation, to using the user model, and adapting
intelligently to the user in a real world application, essentially providing more balance
between the “user modeling” and the “user adapted interaction” aspects of the field.
A fourth shift is just getting underway: modeling groups of people, not just individuals. Stimulated by the growing role of social networks in the world, understanding and
supporting communities of people is becoming every bit as important as understanding
and supporting individuals. Modeling groups of people is not contradictory to modeling individuals: many of the same techniques can be deployed, and understanding
individuals in the context of the groups to which they belong helps in understanding
both them and their groups. A fifth shift has been in the kinds of things modeled and
adapted to. Originally, user models tended to concentrate on the beliefs or knowledge
of individuals. Now, all manner of characteristics are modeled, including affective
states, learning styles, cognitive or psychological states, physical or social context,
etc., and these can be useful in many ways for systems adapting to users. Finally, as
the field has become increasingly relevant and increasingly good at what it does, user
modelers have realized that the social impact of their work is critical. If user modeling
is to reach its full potential, we will have to find ways of assuring people that their
privacy will be preserved even as we understand them better. Fortunately, however,
the better we can understand a person, the more likely it is that we will understand
their privacy needs and how to protect this privacy. Thus, the conflict between user
modeling and privacy protection is not insurmountable, and in fact a stream of user
modeling research is actively exploring privacy itself, a nice blending of computer
and social science.
So, the field of user modeling and adaptivity has adapted and evolved. The one
constant is Alfred Kobsa, still at the helm as editor-in-chief of UMUAI, a journal that
has extremely high standards, great citation statistics and is, in every way, the flagship
for the field. It is a pleasure for us as guest editors to present this special issue in honor
of the field itself but also of Alfred’s 25 years in the trenches, 20 of which he has
devoted to UMUAI.
Here is a brief synopsis of the papers in the special issue.
Throughout the history of personalization research, a key sub-area has been learner
modeling, which deals with aspects of user modeling that are relevant for creating rich
learning environments that are tailored to the individual learner. It is then fitting that
we begin this special issue with a contribution by Michel C. Desmarais and Ryan S. J.
d. Baker who present a carefully crafted overview of learner models that have already
left the lab, techniques that have been established for learner modeling, and aspects
that are emerging as important directions. The paper provides readers with concrete
examples that illustrate key ideas for this review, starting with the nature of skill models, then discussing a selection of the key examples of widely deployed learner models:
cognitive tutors, constraint-based tutors, and content sequencing tutors. Desmarais and
Baker then reflect on the reasons for the success of these tutors and review techniques
for dealing with uncertainty in learner modeling, one of the key technical challenges in
skill modeling—and also highly relevant for much other user modeling. The paper then
reviews approaches to the important issue of validation of learner modeling research.
This contribution concludes by identifying several areas that are the focus of current
research energy, some due to the increasing maturity of the field and others being

123

4

J. Kay, G. McCalla

created by the emergence of new technologies for inexpensive, powerful, pervasive,
mobile and ubiquitous technology: affect, emotion, motivation and disengagement;
meta-cognition and self-regulation; open learner modeling, group and collaborative
learner modeling; and long term learner modeling.
Tanja Mitrovic outlines a longstanding project to take an innovative research idea,
Ohlsson’s constraint-based student modeling (CBM), from a theoretical proposal into
a complete paradigm for developing intelligent tutoring systems of various stripes.
Starting with the SQL-Tutor system in 1996 and building on this, Mitrovic and her
Intelligent Computer Tutoring Group (ITCG) at the University of Canterbury have
created a number of successful CBM-based intelligent tutors and a set of tools that
can be used to develop such tutors. The paper shows in some detail how theory, engineering, and empirical evaluation mutually inform one another. It also illustrates how
new ideas in the field of intelligent tutoring and user modeling flow into such a project
and are illuminated by it. And, it illustrates the value of committing to a particular
approach over the long term and exploring the implications of this approach in intricate
detail. It seems particularly appropriate for this special issue of UMUAI to be able to
provide an inside view of how an important research project that started with a germ
of an idea at the beginning of the field of user modeling has grown to maturity over
the lifetime of the field.
Closely related to learner modeling and personalized educational systems is personalization in cultural heritage, where visitors to physical and virtual cultural heritage
sites can learn and experience aspects that match their preferences, interests, knowledge, context and personal attributes. Liliana Ardissono, Tsvi Kuflik and Daniela
Petrelli present an authoritative and very comprehensive view of cultural heritage personalization, past and emerging. They identify the key dimensions of systems that
have been created and use these dimensions to provide a new and valuable analysis of
the work that has been done. The paper shows the extent of the research, its richness in
terms of the settings, technologies employed, presentation styles, forms of adaptation,
and user modeling techniques. The paper adds flesh to this with detailed concrete
examples of just how key systems have explored these aspects and built our knowledge of them. The final discussion tackles issues related to the enigma that the research
appears so promising but has not yet led to wide deployment. The paper discusses the
challenges still to be met: the need for standardization; the importance of continuity
in the experience, including before and after the actual site visit; social aspects of the
visit; exploitation of emerging technologies and techniques; and evaluations. This area
is a particularly exciting one for personalization research, both because it appears to
be on the cusp of moving into large-scale deployment and because the demands of
cultural heritage personalization drive such a rich agenda for user modeling research.
Joseph Konstan and John Riedl explore the evolution of recommender systems, an
area of intense research interest (both commercial and academic) for the user modeling
community. Their paper shows how, over more than 15 years, the issues in building
recommender systems have evolved from a concentration on predictive accuracy of
recommendations to concern with a wide range of new issues involving the user experience. This broadening reflects general changes in user modeling research during the
same time period, from an early focus on creating and maintaining the user model (the
“user modeling” part of the field) to much broader investigations into how systems

123

Guest editors’ introduction

5

can usefully personalize their interactions with the user (the “user adapted interaction” part of the field). Konstan and Riedl explore all manner of issues that arise when
taking end use context into account: different kinds of users and different needs of
users at different times in the recommender life cycle, trade-offs between individual
needs and group and community needs, different notions of value and quality beyond
just accuracy, various risks and dangers of recommender systems (and personalization
research more generally), and the need for user control and involvement at all stages
of the recommendation process. Their paper concludes by arguing that there are three
main broad sets of issues for those working on recommender systems: better scalability of the algorithms to tackle the vast amount of data and users and possible end
uses available to recommender systems, better exploitation of the immense amount
of user-contributed content (especially implicit content through usage), and enhancement to the research infrastructure to allow more systematic exploration of the wide
range of issues impacted by recommender system research.
The next paper provides a deep analysis of a particular class of recommenders,
which are critiquing-based. These are distinctive in having a foundation that puts the
user in the loop: they tightly intertwine user interfaces that explicitly offer the user an
opportunity to critique a set of recommendations and the underlying algorithmic recommendation mechanisms. This paper is by Li Chen and Pearl Pu, from the research
group that has contributed so much to this class of recommender. The paper presents
several examples of three main classes of critiquing-based recommenders: natural language based, system-suggested, and user-initiated critiques. The paper also analyses
the relative strengths of each. The authors point to emerging use of this approach in
widely used recommenders such as Amazon and MovieLens. They conclude with an
analysis of emerging directions in hybrid systems, with adaptation improvements and
the move to a broader range of domains.
User modeling research has traditionally been perceived as being concerned with
adaptation to individuals, and not having much to do with communities. Georgios
Paliouras shatters this perception in his paper about discovering web-based communities. First, he introduces a graph-based notation that clarifies relationships among
individuals in different types of web communities. Then, he shows how information
about communities can be extracted from the increasingly vast amount of information
available about individuals and their interactions on the web. Further, the information about communities thus extracted turns out to be highly useful for helping to
achieve many of the traditional roles of individualization explored in user modeling
research over the years. The synergy between communities and individuals is getting
even tighter in an era of the social web, with everybody being both a producer and
consumer of web-based information. This implies an increasingly key role in user
modeling research for future community-based modeling and a further broadening of
user modeling into groups and communities of people, not just individuals.
Julita Vassileva’s paper continues this theme of social applications and the very
important issue of encouraging high quality participation in online communities. Here,
the role of personalization is to address the differences in what motivates different
people and how this changes over time. The paper provides an overview of theoretical
foundations for the design of mechanisms to encourage participation. These include
classic and behavioral economics, including the introduction of game-like elements,

123

6

J. Kay, G. McCalla

with the attendant choices of which user actions should drive increases in reputation
and status. Another important theoretical foundation comes from theories of motivation, from psychology, organizational science and sociology. Building from these
foundations, Vassileva explains how they are combined with mobile and ubiquitous
technologies and computer science, to support the tightly inter-related emerging work
in persuasion, design of incentive mechanisms and user modeling and adaptation. The
paper analyses the ways that personalization techniques can be integrated into the
design of incentive mechanisms and the relationship between open user modeling and
social visualization, in each case, drawing parallels between user models, purposes and
forms of intervention. It concludes with directions for new applications that involve
self-directed learning and social activism.
For all of the benefits of personalization, a major downside is the potential of systems that support personalization to seriously violate peoples’ privacy. The paper by
Eran Toch, Yang Wang, and Lorrie Faith Cranor explores this important issue. The
paper first investigates the threat to privacy of three major trends in current technology: social-based personalization, behavioral profiling, and the mobile Web. Then,
the research into techniques for reducing these threats is overviewed. The paper concludes by proposing a framework for helping to understand the privacy risks facing
user modeling systems. This framework can be used by user modeling researchers
to understand the privacy risks of their approach and can provide a starting point for
establishing ways of overcoming these risks. It can also help to predict the impact on
privacy of new technologies, a key need as personalization technology embeds ever
more deeply and broadly into peoples’ lives.
References
Carberry, S.: First International Workshop on User Modeling. AI Magazine, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 72–74 (1987)
Kobsa, A., Wahlster, W. (eds.): In: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on User Modeling,
Maria Laach, Germany 30–31 Aug 1986
Kobsa, A., Wahlster, W. (eds.): User Models in Dialog Systems. Springer, New York (1989)

Author Biographies
Judy Kay is Professor of Computer Science at the University of Sydney. She is a principal in the Computer
Human Adapted Interaction research group (CHAI), leading research in advanced technologies for human
computer interaction, supporting personalisation, pervasive and mobile interaction. She received her Ph.D.
in Computer Science from the University of Sydney. Her personalisation research explores ways to ensure
that people can maintain control over their user model and its use. She creates new tools for interaction
in support of lifelong learning, collaboration and personalised smart services. Dr. Kay’s publications are
in venues for human–computer interaction, pervasive computing, user modelling and personalisation and
artificial intelligence in education and she has served on editorial boards and conference committees in
these areas.
Gord McCalla is a Professor in the Department of Computer Science at the University of Saskatchewan
and Director of the Laboratory for Advanced Research in Educational Systems (ARIES) there. He received
his B.Sc. (Hons) in Mathematical-Statistics and M.Sc. in Computing Science from the University of Alberta,
and his Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of British Columbia. Dr. McCalla has worked in a
variety of areas of artificial intelligence, including natural language dialogue, planning, multi-agent systems,
artificial intelligence in education (AIED), and user modeling, adaptation, and personalization (UMAP).

123

Guest editors’ introduction

7

His current research focus is on personalization in learning systems, with a specific emphasis on mining
fine grained learner behavioural data to find patterns that can help a learning system adapt to individual
differences in learners. Dr. McCalla has published widely in both AIED and UMAP, and has a long record
of service to both research communities.

123
