Human Computation and Serious Games: Papers from the 2012 AIIDE Joint Workshop
AAAI Technical Report WS-12-17

Artificial Intelligence and Personalization
Opportunities for Serious Games
A. Brisson, G. Pereira, R. Prada, A. Paiva

S. Louchart , N. Suttie, T. Lim

INESC-ID and Instituto Superior Técnico,
Technical University of Lisbon

Harriot-Watt University

R. Lopes, R. Bidarra

F. Bellotti

TUDelft

University of Genoa

M. Kravcik

M. Oliveira

RWTH-Aachen

Sintef

Abstract

by the community and then break them down and relate them
with the main challenges within the fields of user modeling
and content adaptation. Our goal is to provide for each research challenge, a brief description, a list of related SG examples, the steaming research questions that derive from it
and previous contributions from research that address it.

Effectiveness of Serious Games (SG) depends very
much on their capacity to provide the right balance between gaming and educational experience. This requirement raises challenges regarding realization of their intelligence and personalization. We aim to overcome the
problems of research fragmentation and identify some
of the main issues by presenting a summary of relevant
contributions from Artificial Intelligence and Personalization, together with a discussion on their future directions. In this paper, we summarize approaches to user
and learning goals modeling, user engagement, various
levels of game adaptation, how new sensors and mobile
technology can better identify the context of the user,
content adaptation and reusability.

Research Questions and Challenges
Identification
We started by identifying two high level research questions
for SG that include most of its multidisciplinary spectrum:
• To what extent is the effectiveness and efficacy of learning
supported and promoted via SGs?
• How do we relate content (the factual knowledge
contained, game mechanics) and context (experiences
and activities) to pedagogical goals towards supporting
pedagogically-driven design and development of SGs?

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Personalization are both essential aspects of all games, be they serious or entertainment
based. In this research the role of AI and Personalization is
however focused upon the context of Serious Games (SG) in
particular. A concerted research direction is necessary in this
area so as to establish future benchmarks and metrics for the
effective use of AI and Personalization in serious games design and will benefit relevant research communities in providing clear goals and focus . While the transition of AI and
Personalization approaches from research labs to SG products is clearly needed, this is an impact area where research
in labs may have a real benefit and impact upon products
and SGs on the market, as markets mature over the next few
years.
The work presented in this paper is a summary of the current results of an ongoing cooperation between 9 different
institutions within a network of 28 research labs and 6 game
developers are gathering their efforts to identify the hot topics for AI and Personalization within SG research. We first
present our perspective on the main research questions faced

From these two high-level questions we derived a more
pragmatic approach to AI and Personalization based on: In
what ways can personalization improve learning and adapt
best to learner requirements?
This questions allowed us to focus upon exploring how
personalization undertaken on the fly and dynamically
within games environments can specifically benefit the
learner. This process involves two distinct challenges: User
Identification and Content Adaptation.
We consider User Identification as the process of identifying and inferring the characteristics of who is playing the
game. Within this very broad research topic we focus especially on two sub topics that are extremely relevant for identifying a user and keep him actively involved in the interactive learning process: User Models for Interactive Learning
and Detection of User Engagement.
Content Adaptation can be used to provide an effective
system response to who is playing the game, by presenting a

Copyright c 2012, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

51

for interactive learning has been implemented in the Travel
in Europe and SeaGame projects (Bellotti et al. 2009a;
2009b). There, the idea is that an AI runtime module called
the Experience Engine dynamically creates missions as sequences of tasks that are dynamically assigned to the user
in order to maximize the fulfillment of the requirements expressed by the teacher/game author. The user profile contains parameters such as: skill level, navigation ability (in
particular, but not exclusively, for 3D environments), task
type preferences, task type need, skill needs and preferences,
learning styles needs/preferences (Bellotti et al. 2009c).

personalized view of the game content and learning materials. We pay special attention to: Content Personalization to
Learner, adaptation to User Experience and Learning Goals
and Non-Player Characters in a Learning Environment.

User Identification
User Identification is key in current Technology Enhanced
Learning systems since it allows enabling user adaptation,
which is a necessary feature in order to increase effectiveness and efficiency of the instructional support.
The basis for user identification is the definition of a
model that abstracts the distinctive features of a user, so
that it can be continuously updated by the system’s sensors
while giving input to a personalization engine, that adapts
the contents and their provision modalities to the elicited requirements. In this paper we also focus on detection of user
engagement, since engagement is a major feature of games
and serious games. In order to be effective (i.e., able to support knowledge and skill acquisition), SGs must be appealing and capable of motivating the player towards the activities that have an educational value, exploiting entertainment
as a means to deliver instruction.

Stemming Research Questions Which user models are
more useful to the interactive learning process, and at what
conditions? What variables should a user model include?
What methods should be used to model the user? What measures should be taken in order to estimate in real-time the
user? What techniques can be used to infer the users goals?
Previous Contributions The importance of User Models has been discussed across several areas of research
(Brusilovsky 2001; Donkers and Spronck 2006; Houlette
2004; Yannakakis and Maragoudakis 2005), including for
learning environments (del Blanco et al. 2010; Leutner
1993). Even though the considerations on user models such
as in (Brusilovsky 1996) and models such as Demographig
Game Design (Bateman and Boom 1995 2012) represent important and well known contributions, the only SG specific
model we found is in Travel in Europe and Seagame (Bellotti
et al. 2009a, Bellotti et al. 2009b, Bellotti et al. 2009c), that
we have outlined above. Given the limited-ness of the studies and evaluations, further research on user models for interactive learning in serious game settings is urgently needed.

User Models for Interactive Learning
The rationale behind user models for interactive learning
consists in the need to properly adapt to different user learning styles and overall preferences. In this view, we first need
to be able to conceptualize the user in terms of learning capabilities. The model consists of those parameters that more
accurately characterize the specific users and/or categories.
An established way of cataloguing learning styles was proposed by (Fleming and Mills 1992), that developed a theory VARK - that categorizes learners as: Visual learners
(with a preference for tools such as pictures, concept maps),
Aural learners (listening and discussion), Reading/Writingpreference learners( textual stimulus), and Kinesthetic or
Tactile learners (movement and hands-on practice).
A proper framework should include a module able to
translate signals from physical (e.g., cameras, Electroencephalogram, etc.) and virtual sensors (e.g., answering to
quizzes inside a game) into values filling a proper model
mainly integrating learning styles and user preferences. This
is the estimated status of the user.
In order to adapt to different learning styles properly we
first need to be able to conceptualize the user in terms of
his learning capabilities and learning progress. In particular,
it is necessary to investigate what the parameters are that
more accurately characterize the user and their mapping to
specific player categories.

Detection of User Engagement
User engagement is both a very particular aspect of game development, and of the success of learning applications. Research in user engagement can provide a very serious contribution to SGs by defining which user inputs are relevant to
assess the user engagement in both the game and the learning process. Furthermore, the interaction between the assessment of the learning process and the assessment of the game
experience will have an impact on the priorities of the AI
strategies used to engage the user in a fun learning process.
It is not just about to adapting to learning style but to the
way users have fun, and maintain interest in playing a SG.
Since SGs often provide a learner with complex multidimensional environments , adaption must be executed in
real-time so as to continuously balance challenge against
enjoyment as described in Csikszentmihalyi’s concept of
”flow”(Csikszentmihalyi 1990). Flow is considered as an intrinsically enjoyable state characterised by deep concentration, enjoyment and often associated with altered sense of
time and concern for one’s self(Sweester and Wyeth 2005).
In this context, players affect and related states such as motivation, empathy and attention are also known to play a key
role in influencing learning outcomes(Arroyo et al. 2009).

SG Examples User model methods have been widely
used in the context of Tutoring Systems (del Blanco et al.
2010; Brusilovsky 1998; 2001; 1996; Burgos et al. 2007;
Donkers and Spronck 2006; Houlette 2004; Yannakakis and
Maragoudakis 2005). Despite their diffusion in such systems
and the fact that they should be a fundamental technique
also in Serious Games, the scientific references to them are
not common. The major example of SG using user modeling

52

However, for these algorithms to provide reliable data (to
an extent), it is necessary to carry out a large amount of
data gathering, system training and computationally intensive off-line processing. In the particular context of real-time
SG applications, it is wholly unrealistic to project implementing heavy, data hungry algorithms. Thus, trade-offs and
concessions must be made between 1) The spectrum of detection (granularity) and the amount of data gathered and 2)
Detection accuracy and processing time. Realistically, current state-of-the-art in signal processing would only allow
for a real-time algorithm to detect general states such as
alertness or arousal with a low degree of reliability. It is clear
for now that signals detected through these algorithms need
to be correlated with task-based performance indexes such
as success rates, speed or reliability.

And the development of serious game adaptive technologies is a non-trivial task. Hocine et al. (Hocine and Gouaich
2011) identified the following challenges:
1. A game should adapt to a players competency levels.
Users are likely to express a wide range of cognitive and
motor skills affecting both their preferences and performances during game-play. Serious Games must not only
take into account their ability to play the game but their
existing knowledge of the subject domain (Conati and
Zhao 2004). Games that either supersede or fail to meet
a players capacity are likely to fail to maintain player engagement [6].
2. Adaptation must meet real-time performance constraints.
Consequently, any performance overhead added by the
use of adaptive technology must be limited to maintain
response time and interaction quality [7].

Content Adaptation

3. Maintain flow or immersion in the game. While a design
constraints, the notion of flow and game-play must be
taken into account in the choice of pedagogical approach
or exercise-based gaming activity.

Content Adaptation enables SGs to realize the final step of
in-game player personalization. Steered by the underlying
data and models stemming from User Identification, content
adaptation uses this data to generate or customize personalized game content.

4. Correctly Balancing ludic and pedagogical content.
Kickmeier-Rust et al. (Kickmeister-Rust and Albert 2012)
stated that the ultimate goal of serious game design must
be the achievement of the learning objectives and that
game-play motivational aspects only serve so as to support this goal. Hence, It is not simply enough to have a
player continually engaged with a SG if it does not result
in the appropriate pedagogical gains for the player (Rowe
et al. 2009). We must take advantage of the other game
elements to provide an efficient learning environment.

Content Personalization to Learner
In order to change how content is presented and effectively
adapt to the user, SGs include knowledge on what learning styles have been classified and what content presentation
strategies map to each of them. Typically, a supporting user
model is responsible for dynamically assigning the player to
these different learning styles and strategies. The appropriate
strategies can then be applied by a specialized component
(e.g. centralized AI managers, content generators, agent organization frameworks), which constructs and presents the
personalized content to the player.

The game-play/pedagogy relationship described above
lies on whether or not ludic and pedagogical content are
contributing to an efficient and engaging educational experience. In this context, research in this area should primarily
focus on measuring the contribution of these elements towards both learning and enjoyment.

SG Examples Content personalization techniques are
used in two serious game examples which are part of two
previous European projects. Several publications regarding techniques used to adapt the interactive application to
the learner have been reported in the projects The 80 days
Project (80D ; Kickmeier-Rust, Göbel, and Albert 2008)and
the Elektra Project (Elektra ; Kickmeier-Rust et al. 2006)
Additionally, in(Hullett and Mateas 2009), such techniques were also used in scenario generation applied to
emergency rescue training games. Furthermore, earlier work
from (Magerko, Stensrud, and Holt 2006) and (Niehaus and
Riedl 2009) supports the generation of personalized scenarios in military training games.
(Bellotti et al. 2009a) describe the Experience Engine, a
runtime content delivery management engine, designed to
optimize the serious game experience, joining educational
value and entertainment. Personalised conditions for presentation of different content in interactive TV-based serious
games are presented in (Bellotti et al. 2001).

SG Examples EU-funded ALICE game(ALI )
Stemming Research Questions Which user models are
more useful to the interactive learning process? What variables should a user model include? What methods can and
should be used to model the user? What techniques can be
used to infer the users goals?
Previous Contributions Fairclough (Fairclough 2007)
discussed potential elements for the measurement of realtime relevant brain activities for Brain Computer Interface
(BCI). Additionally, a number of EEG-based algorithms
have been developed towards detecting and monitoring user
engagement(Chaouachi et al. 2010; Russell, Weiss, and
Mendelsohn 1989; Liu et al. 2010; Prinzel III et al. 2003) so
as to develop autonomous adaptive systems. Through these
algorithms, it is possible to identify to an extent levels of
vigilance, anxiety, arousal or engagement.

Stemming Research Questions How, when and which
content should adapt to the player?

53

Previous Contributions Part of the answer to this topic
is found on the previous one, especially in Interactive Storytelling, since it is by design a mechanism which guides
the user throughout its experience. By combining the learning goals and the fun goals in this process the two sides of
the user experience are balanced. However, three more areas
are fundamental to address it: Natural Language Processing,
Strategy Formulation and Learning Adaptation and Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
The Natural Language Processing, plays an important part
since it provides to non player characters the ability to converse with users using natural language, a much more natural way of communicating for humans. Several techniques
can be used to improve natural language processing in a system.
Regarding Strategy formulation, even though mainly used
in commercial games the techniques under this topic enable
AI to adapt strategies to the user, this upkeep the original
goals of the AI (in a learning context those might be learning goals!). In doing so, provides means for games to avoid
becoming predictable and boring.
The Learning Adaptation and Intelligent Tutoring Systems techniques have been widely used outside the gaming
field. However, in combination with Interactive Storytelling
they provide important methodologies to manage user experience.

Previous Contributions The answer on how to adapt content to the user entails different strategies. Each strategy is
derived from the different aspects to which the user has access in the game (both interactively or just visually). As
such, a complete answer should cover a wide range of
methodologies and techniques. In this paper we will only
discuss some that we found more relevant: Interactive Storytelling, Procedural Level Generation and Adaptive Game
Balancing.
Interactive Storytelling is a medium where a user can influence the narrative and its evolution, in real-time, and as
such, the game surrounding content can be adapted to the
user. The approaches taken by researchers to adapt story
knowledge to dynamic interactive environments fall between two extremes: Character Centered Approaches: all
story knowledge is encoded in the character’s AI. (Cavazza
et al. 2002) and Mediated Approaches: conflicts between
story development and user interaction are managed by a
special entity called the mediator.(Figueiredo et al. 2008;
Mateas and Stern 2003; Saretto and Young 2001)
In Procedural Level Generation the adaptation occurs
through the generation of content tailored specifically to
the users characteristics. This tailored content can refer to
both: (i) training/teaching scenarios and missions and (ii)
game worlds and its objects. As recently surveyed in (Lopes
and Bidarra 2011), many approaches are already being researched, e.g. evolutionary algorithms, semantic modeling
or answer-set programming.
Adaptive Game Balancing is an effective adaptation
method, where game features (typically the challenge level)
are adjusted to player performance. The standard approach
for this is Dynamic Difficulty Adjustment, a technique
where AI behavior is automatically balanced to match the
measured player ability (e.g. using case-based algorithms).

Non-player Characters in Learning Environments
The personalization of game content includes the adaptation
of all the interaction modalities found in games(Peirce, Conlan, and Wade 2008). Since NPCs are currently one of the
most relevant elements of game interaction we should carefully address their impact on the learning goals while designing and creating NPCs for educational purposes. The central
goal for NPCs is believability through natural behaviors and
intelligent interaction(Zielke et al. 2009).

User Experience and Learning Goals
Alongside with adaptability to the user’s learning capabilities is the capacity to support the user, both task and emotion
wise. Such adaptation is a delicate balance between satisfying both user and tutors intentions.

SG Examples Currently there are several SG which make
use of NPC AI in order to create personalized and more realistic learning environments. In the area of negotiation skills
for specific cultural contexts there is Elect Bilat(Hill Jr et
al. 2006) making use of tutoring technology, dialogue manager and social simulation to create more realistic NPCs and
provide intelligent interactions for the user. Another example is the utilization of crowd simulation is the riot control
scenario of the ADMS SG from ETC Simulation.

SG Examples The application of techniques to balance
the fun and learning experiences can be found in two
games. One is from the Elektra Project addressing the players immersion versus the game based learning(Elektra ;
Kickmeier-Rust et al. 2006)
Another example is the serious game Crystal Island is an
environment that supports an inquiry-based approach, where
the story is a sort of a container of elements to be taken in
considerations in order for the player to solve problems in
the domain of biology (Mott and Lester 2006).

Stemming Research Questions Which non-player character behavior models are best suited for interacting with a
learner/user?
Previous Contributions Throughout our survey of techniques there are three areas which offer fundamental contributions to the topic of NPCs: Artificial Tutors, NPC Competitors and Crowds.
The Artificial Tutors are mainly applied through NPCs
for collaboration with the user or pedagogical agents. These
play an important role for several serious games purposes:

Stemming Research Questions How can we maintain an
engaging user experience inside the intended learning experience boundaries? How can techniques from diverse areas
of AI engage the player? How can the techniques still support the learning experience while supporting engagement?

54

SFRHBD/37476/2007 and SFRHBD/66663/2009.

educational and motivational support, emotional regulation,
improvement of fun/immersion and instantiation for collaboration. Models for tutoring agents(Nunes et al. 2010;
Kickmeier-Rust and Albert 2010) address important challenges which emerge from the needed interdisciplinary work
from HCI, pedagogy and psychology.
The NPC competitors, complement the universe of roles
of the Artificial Tutors by empowering NPCs the capabilities to undertake antagonistic tasks regarding the learner.
The competitive nature is frequently useful in learning environments for the creation of required challenges (examples
chess adversary, terrorist npc, mob npc), where the agents
must be able to plan strategies for challenge creation.
Crowds NPCs (Anderson et al. 2009; Thalmann et al.
2004) bring the behavioral issue to the context of a high
number of characters, alongside with its own set of challenges such as simulation performance and variability of the
generated behaviors. However, when properly applied (human like behaviors, as it has seen in numerous techniques)
create a very impressive added value to the believability of
a learning environment. Imagine a SG where you learn the
taks of a mob control policeman where the mob to be controlled is composed of just 5 or 6 NPCs. The believability
and impact of this simulation will be drastically reduced
when compared with another situation where you have hundreds of NPCs.
The different types of NPCs for SG presented are complimentary, in the sense that they can provide a SG different
aspects to NPCs believability (individual and social) and immersion(Zielke et al. 2009).

References
80 days eu project http://www.eightydays.eu/ last checked:
July, 4th 2012.
Alice project, http://www.aliceproject.eu/ last checked:
July4th, 2010.
Anderson, E.; McLoughlin, L.; Liarokapis, F.; Peters, C.;
Petridis, P.; and de Freitas, S. 2009. Serious games in cultural heritage. In The 10th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST-State
of the Art Reports.
Arroyo, I.; Muldner, K.; Burleson, W.; and Woolf, B. 2009.
Designing affective support to foster learning, motivation,
and attribution. In Closing the Affective Loop in Intelligent
Learning Environments Workshop at the 14th International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education. Brighton,
UK.
Bateman, C., and Boom, R. 1995-2012. 21st Century Game
Design. LAVOISIER S.A.S.
Bellotti, F.; Berta, R.; Gloria, A.; and Ozolina., A. 2001. Investigating the added value of interactivity and serious gaming for educational tv. Elsevier, Computers & Education
57:1137–1148.
Bellotti, F.; Berta, R.; De Gloria, A.; and Primavera, L.
2009a. Adaptive experience engine for serious games.
IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in
Games 1(4):264–280.
Bellotti, F.; Berta, R.; Gloria, A. D.; and Primavera, L.
2009b. Enhancing the educational value of video games.
Comput. Entertain. 7(2):23:1–23:18.
Bellotti, F.; Berta, R.; Gloria, A. D.; and Primavera, L.
2009c. A task annotation model for sandbox serious games.
In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG 2009), 233–240.
Brusilovsky, P. 1996. Methods and techniques of adaptive
hypermedia. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction
6:87–129.
Brusilovsky, P. 1998. Adaptive educational systems on the
world-wide-web: A review of available technologies. In
Proceedings of Workshop ”WWW-Based Tutoring” at 4th
International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems
(ITS’98).
Brusilovsky, P. 2001. Adaptive hypermedia. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction 11:87–110.
Burgos, D.; Moreno-Ger, P.; Sierra, J. L.; FernándezManjón, B.; and Koper, R. 2007. Authoring game-based
adaptive units of learning with ims learning design and ¡eadventure¿. International Journal of LEarning Technologies
3(3):252–268.
Cavazza, M.; ; Charles, F.; and Mead, S. 2002. Characterbased interactive storytelling. IEEE INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 17:17–24.
Chaouachi, M.; Chalfoun, P.; Jraidi, I.; and Frasson, C.
2010. Affect and mental engagement: Towards adaptability for intelligent systems. In AAAI.

Conclusions
AI and personalization are crucial aspects of SG, but their
effective and efficient design and implementation still represent major challenges. To achieve various pedagogical goals
in different educational contexts, it is important to simplify
the process of authoring and adjustment of SG by people
without programming skills. In this paper we have identified
several research topics that we consider relevant in this field,
like identification of learning goals, user modelling and engagement, as well as different levels of game adaptation.
They should be further investigated and realized, in order
to support effective and efficient design, development, and
deployment of SG.
If we want to take into account various factors that influence these complex processes, multidisciplinary research is
required. Our aim is to use the opportunity that the GALA
Network of Excellence on Serious Games is providing us
from this perspective, and proceed with more in depth investigation and analysis of the key issues, some of which we
have outlined in this paper. We hope this endeavour will help
to reduce the gap between SG research and SG industry.

Acknowledgments
Work supported by GaLA (Games & Learning Alliance)
Network of Excellence funded by the EU in FP7-ICT-20095 under grant agreement no: 258169; FCT (INESC-ID multiannual funding) PIDDAC Program funds. PhD grants FCT

55

Kickmeister-Rust, M., and Albert, D. 2012. An Alien’s
Guide to Multi-Adaptive Educational Computer Games.
UIU-CADUI.
Leutner. 1993. Guided discovery learning with computerbased simulation games: Effects of adaptive and nonadaptive instructional support. In Learning and Instruction,
113–132. Elsevier.
Liu, Y.; Kosmadoudi, Z.; Sung, R.; Lim, T.; Louchart, S.;
and Ritchie, J. 2010. Capture user emotions during
computer- aided design,. In Proceedings of the Integrated
Design and Manufacturing in Mechanical Engineering (IDMME) and Virtual Conference.
Lopes, R., and Bidarra, R. 2011. Adaptivity challenges
in games and simulations: a survey. IEEE Transactions on
Computational Intelligence and AI in Games 3(2):85 –99.
Magerko, B.; Stensrud, B.; and Holt, L. 2006. Bringing the
schoolhouse inside the box - A tool for engaging, individualized training. In Proceedings of the 25th Army Science
Conference. ASC.
Mateas, M., and Stern, A. 2003. Façade: An experiment in
building a fully-realized interactive drama. In Game Developers Conference, Game Design track.
Mott, B. W., and Lester, J. C. 2006. U-director: a decisiontheoretic narrative planning architecture for storytelling environments. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-agent Systems
(AAMAS 2006), 977–984.
Niehaus, J., and Riedl, M. O. 2009. Scenario adaptation:
An approach to customizing computer-based training games
and simulations. In Proceedings of the AIED 2009 Workshop
on Intelligent Educational Games, 89–98.
Nunes, M.; Dihl, L.; Fraga, L.; Woszezenki, C.; Oliveira,
L.; Francisco, D.; Machado, G.; Nogueira, C.; and Notargiacomo, M. 2010. Animated pedagogical agent in the intelligent virtual teaching environment. Digital Education Review (4):53–61.
Peirce, N.; Conlan, O.; and Wade, V. 2008. Adaptive educational games: Providing non-invasive personalised learning
experiences. In Digital Games and Intelligent Toys Based
Education, 2008 Second IEEE International Conference on,
28–35. Ieee.
Prinzel III, L.; Freeman, F.; Scerbo, M.; Mikulka, P.; and
A.T, P. 2003. Effects of a psychophysiological system
for adaptive automation on performance, workload, and the
event-related potential p300 component. Human Factors
45(4):601–614.
Rowe, J.; McQuiggan, S.; Robinson, J.; and Lester, J. 2009.
Off-task behaviour in narrative-centered learning environments. In 14th International Conference of Artificial Intelligence and Education, 99–106.
Russell, J. A.; Weiss, A.; and Mendelsohn, G. A. 1989. Affect grid: a single-item scale of pleasure and arousal. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 493–502.
Saretto, C., and Young, M. R. 2001. Mediation in mimesis
liquid narratives. In Proceedings of the 39th ACM Southeast
Conference, 120–126.

Conati, C., and Zhao, X. 2004. Building and evaluating an
intelligent pedagogical agent to improve the effectiveness
of an educational game. In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, IUI ’04,
6–13. New York, NY, USA: ACM.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1990. Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
del Blanco, Á.; Torrente, J.; Moreno-Ger, P.; and FernándezManjón, B. 2010. Integrating adaptive games in studentcentered virtual learning environments. Distance Education
Technologies 8(3).
Donkers, J., and Spronck, P. 2006. Preference-based player
modeling. In AI Game Programming Wisdom 3, 647 – 659.
Boston, MA: Charles River Media.
Elektra. Elektra project, http://www.elektra-project.org/
lastchecked: July, 4th 2012.
Fairclough, S. H. 2007. Psychophysiological inference
and physiological computer games. In Brainplay’07: BrainComputer Interfaces and Games.
Figueiredo, R.; Brisson, A.; Aylett, R.; and Paiva, A. 2008.
Emergent stories facilitated: An architecture to generate stories using intelligent synthetic characters. In International
Conference on Interactive Digital Storytelling. (ICIDS). Erfurt: Springer.
Fleming, N., and Mills, C. 1992. Not another inventory,
rather a catalyst for reflection. To Improve the Academy
11:147–149.
Hill Jr, R.; Belanich, J.; Lane, H.; Core, M.; Dixon, M.; Forbell, E.; Kim, J.; and Hart, J. 2006. Pedagogically structured
game-based training: Development of the elect bilat simulation. Technical report, DTIC Document.
Hocine, N., and Gouaich, A. 2011. Agent programming and
adaptive serious games: A survey of the state of the art. In
10th Int. Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Houlette, R. 2004. Player modeling for adaptive games.
In AI Game Programming Wisdom 2. Boston, MA: Charles
River Media.
Hullett, K., and Mateas, M. 2009. Scenario generation for
emergency rescue training games. In Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games.
Kickmeier-Rust, M., and Albert, D. 2010. Micro-adaptivity:
protecting immersion in didactically adaptive digital educational games. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning
26(2):95–105.
Kickmeier-Rust, M. D.; Kickmeier-Rust, M. D.; Schwarz,
D.; Albert, D.; Verpoorten, D.; Castaigne, J.-L.; and Bopp,
M. 2006. The elektra project: Towards a new learning experience. M3 – Interdisciplinary Aspectcs on Digital Media &
Education.
Kickmeier-Rust, M. D.; Göbel, S.; and Albert, D. 2008.
80days: Melding adaptive educational technology and adaptive and interactive storytelling in digital educational games.
In Proceedings of the First International Workshop on StoryTelling and Educational Games (STEG’08).

56

Sweester, P., and Wyeth, P. 2005. Gameflow: A model for
evaluating player enjoyment in games. ACM Computer in
Entertainment 3(3).
Thalmann, D.; Hery, C.; Lippman, S.; Ono, H.; Regelous,
S.; and Sutton, D. 2004. Crowd and group animation. In
ACM SIGGRAPH 2004 course notes, 34. ACM.
Yannakakis, G., and Maragoudakis, M. 2005. Player modeling impact on player’s entertainment in computer games. In
User Modeling, volume 3538 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, 74–78. Berlin: Springer.
Zielke, M.; Evans, M.; Dufour, F.; Christopher, T.; Donahue,
J.; Johnson, P.; Jennings, E.; Friedman, B.; Ounekeo, P.; and
Flores, R. 2009. Serious games for immersive cultural training: Creating a living world. Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE 29(2):49–60.

57


